Be Tangential to Manifold: Discovering
Riemannian Metric for Diffusion Models
Shinnosuke Saito1and Takashi Matsubara2,1
1Hokkaido University2AI Lab, CyberAgent, Inc.
saitou.shinnosuke.y0@elms.hokudai.ac.jp
matsubara_takashi@cyberagent.co.jp
Abstract. Diffusion models are powerful deep generative models, but
unlike classical models, they lack an explicit low-dimensional latent space
that parameterizes the data manifold. This absence makes it difficult
to perform manifold-aware operations, such as geometrically faithful in-
terpolation or conditional guidance that respects the learned manifold.
We propose a training-free Riemannian metric on the noise space, de-
rived from the Jacobian of the score function. The key insight is that
the spectral structure of this Jacobian separates tangent and normal
directions of the data manifold; our metric leverages this separation to en-
courage paths to stay tangential to the manifold rather than drift toward
high-density regions. To validate that our metric faithfully captures the
manifold geometry, we examine it from two complementary angles. First,
geodesics under our metric yield perceptually more natural interpolations
than existing methods on synthetic, image, and video frame datasets.
Second, the tangent–normal decomposition induced by our metric pre-
vents classifier-free guidance from deviating off the manifold, improving
generation quality while preserving text-image alignment.
Keywords:Diffusion Models·Manifold Hypothesis·Riemannian Ge-
ometry·Image Interpolation·Classifier-Free Guidance
1 Introduction
Diffusion models are a class of deep generative models (DGMs) that have shown
a remarkable capability to generate high-fidelity, diverse content [33,73,81]. A key
theoreticallensforunderstandingandimprovingDGMsisthemanifold hypothesis,
which states that real-world data (e.g., images) are concentrated around a low-
dimensional manifold embedded in the high-dimensional data space [8,20]. Under
this hypothesis, DGMs are understood to learn not only the data distribution
but also its underlying manifold, either explicitly or implicitly [54].
Among DGMs, variational autoencoders (VAEs) [46] and generative adversar-
ial networks (GANs) [24] possess a low-dimensional latent space, which serves as
an explicit parameterization of the data manifold [3]. On this latent space, one
can define a Riemannian metric by pulling back the data-space metric through
the decoder [25], enabling geometrically meaningful operations. For example,
arXiv:2510.05509v3  [cs.CV]  17 Jul 2026
2 S. Saito and T. Matsubara
Fig. 1: A prominent example.(left) Interpolation paths on a C-shaped distribution.
(right) A plot of the probability density transitions for interpolation paths. LERP
cuts through a low-density region. SLERP deviates from the manifold. Density-based
interpolation approaches a high-density region and traverses it, not preserving the
probabilities of the endpoints.Oursruns parallel to the manifold, yielding natural
transitions with preserved endpoint probabilities.
traversing the latent space along geodesics yields interpolations that are faithful
to the intrinsic geometric structure of the data [5,6,13,75]. However, diffusion
models lack such a low-dimensional latent space; their noise space has the same
dimensionality as the data space, making it nontrivial to define a meaningful
pullback metric.
Some previous studies have attempted to define a Riemannian metric for
diffusion models based on the density of noisy samples or the direction to
the manifold (see Fig. 1) [7,98]. Geodesics under these metrics, however, may
overly approach the center of the data distribution, resulting in over-smoothed
images [39]. The fundamental issue is that density or direction only tell uswhere
samples concentrate, but nothowthe manifold is oriented in the ambient space.
This raises a natural question:can we define a Riemannian metric for diffusion
models that directly reflects the intrinsic geometry of the data manifold, rather
than its density?
Fig. 2: A conceptual illustration.
Our metric is derived from the Jaco-
bianJxtof the score function sθ, whose
spectralstructureseparatestangentand
normal directions, TxtMtandNxtMt,
of the data manifoldM t.We answer this affirmatively. We build
on prior observations that the Jacobian
of the score function already encodes this
geometry: its spectral structure separates
the tangent and normal directions of the
data manifold (illustrated conceptually in
Fig. 2) [85,91]. Building on this insight,
we propose a Riemannian metric on the
noise space, defined as the pullback of the
Euclidean metric through the score func-
tion. This metric assigns high cost to move-
ment along normal directions and low cost
along tangent directions, thereby encour-
aging paths to stay tangential to the data
Discovering Riemannian Metric for Diffusion Models 3
manifold. Because it is constructed solely from the Jacobian of a pre-trained
score function, it requires no additional training or architectural modifications.
The contribution of this work is the proposed Riemannian metric itself, which
turns this known tangent–normal characterization into a concrete geometric
foundation for understanding the data manifold in diffusion models and designing
manifold-aware operations. We examine the metric from two complementary
angles. Together, these angles serve to validate that the metric faithfully cap-
tures the geometry of the data manifold and to demonstrate its practical utility.
(i) Global geometry through interpolation(Secs. 4.1 to 4.3): Geodesics
under our metric should stay on or run parallel to the manifold, producing per-
ceptually natural transitions. Experiments on synthetic, image, and video frame
datasets confirm this.(ii) Local geometry through guidance correction
(Sec. 4.4): The tangent–normal decomposition induced by our metric should
prevent classifier-free guidance (CFG) [34] from pushing samples off the manifold.
The guidance correction consistently improves FID while maintaining CLIP Score,
and the improved quality transfers to distilled models at no additional overhead.
2 Related Work
Riemannian Geometry of Deep Generative Models.In VAEs and GANs,
the latent space parameterizes the data manifold, and linear traversals in this
space are widely used for editing semantic attributes of generated images [23,27,
30,61,67,77,78,84,92,105]. However, as real-world data distributions are skewed
and heterogeneous, linear manipulations often fall short, motivating nonlinear
approaches [1,2,14,15,37,43,52,71,89,90]. A principled way to handle such
nonlinearity is to equip the latent space with a Riemannian metric [25]. Some
methods learn a metric through additional networks, which may overwrite the
originalmanifoldstructure[4,50,83,95].Othersconstructthepullbackmetricfrom
the Euclidean metric on the data space through the decoder (or the generator) of
a pre-trained model without additional training [5,6,13,18,75]. Our work follows
the latter, training-free approach, but extends it to diffusion models, whose noise
space is not low-dimensional.
Data Manifold in Diffusion Models.Diffusion models learn a score function
sθ(xt, t), which iteratively denoises noisy samples backward in time from t=Tto
t= 0toformthedatadistribution[33,73,80 –82].Aspaceofnoisysamplesat t >0
isoftenreferredtoasanoise space.Diffusionmodelshavebeenshowntoimplicitly
learn the data manifold through this denoising process [22,65,68,88,94,99]. One
common assumption is that high-density regions of the learned distribution
correspond to the data manifold, but recent studies have shown that image
likelihood is negatively correlated with perceptual detail: images in high-density
regions are often over-smoothed, whereas those in lower-density regions may
contain richer textures [39]. From a different perspective, several studies have
estimated the local intrinsic dimension of the data manifold [35,36,38,85,91].
Their key insight is that the Jacobian of the score function exhibits a rank
4 S. Saito and T. Matsubara
deficiency corresponding to the codimension of the data manifold, or in practice
a sharp spectral gap, which separates the normal directions of the data manifold
from the tangent directions [85,91]. Rather than relying on density, we build
upon this spectral characterization to define a Riemannian metric on the noise
space of a pre-trained diffusion model.
Interpolation in Diffusion Models.Although latent diffusion models [73]
operate on the latent space of an autoencoder, this space is designed for percep-
tual compression rather than semantic representation, and simple interpolations
therein do not yield coherent transitions. Interpolation methods in the noise
space can be broadly categorized into four groups. (i) Closed-form methods
operate directly in the noise space. LERP [33] treats it as a flat Euclidean space,
leading to small norms and loss of detailed features. SLERP [79,81] preserves
norms along a hypersphere, and other variants adjust norms by other heuris-
tics [10,74,102]. (ii) Surrogate latent-space methods exploit intermediate layers
of the diffusion network [31,47,62,63], but skip connections allow information to
bypass these layers, limiting their ability to serve as self-contained representations.
(iii) Training-dependent methods employ additional networks or modify the ar-
chitecture for interpolation [26,28,44,58,69,76,93,96,100], but require additional
training and cannot be applied to arbitrary pre-trained models. (iv) Riemannian
metric-based methods define a geometry on the noise space without additional
training. GeodesicDiffusion [98] defines a conformal metric using the inverse
density of noisy samples, and Azeglio and Bernardo [7] propose a metric inspired
by the Fisher information matrix (FIM); both guide geodesics toward high-density
regions, as examined for normalizing flows [83] and energy-based models [9]. How-
ever, high-density regions do not necessarily correspond to perceptually detailed
images [39], which can result in over-smoothed and cartoonish interpolations.
Although some studies draw inspiration from statistical manifolds, it remains
unclear what geometric structures their methods leverage [40,55]. Our metric
falls in this category but differs fundamentally: rather than favoring high-density
regions, it leverages the spectral structure of the score Jacobian to keep geodesics
tangential to the data manifold, keeping the density level.
Guidance Methods.One can condition the denoising process on a text prompt
[73]. Classifier-free guidance (CFG) amplifies this condition to make generated
images more faithful to text prompts [34], and the negative prompt suppresses
concepts specified by a complementary prompt [73]. Some guidance methods
additionally utilize external information [12,72,86]. However, it is well known
that these guidance methods can distort the learned data manifold, leading to
visually unnatural outcomes. Recent studies have attempted to mitigate this
issue. CFG++ [17] uses the unconditional score instead of the CFG-based score
for renoising steps, while TCFG [48] projects the unconditional score onto the
subspace shared with the conditional one via SVD. Although these methods are
motivated by the existence of the data manifold, they do not formally define
or characterize its geometry, and their corrections remain heuristic. Our metric
Discovering Riemannian Metric for Diffusion Models 5
providessuchanexplicitgeometriccharacterization,whichenablesageometrically
grounded correction that decomposes the guidance term into tangent and normal
components and suppresses the latter.
3 Method
3.1 Proposed Riemannian Metric
Definition of Proposed Metric.We define a Riemannian metric on the noise
space that captures the local geometry of the data manifold through the score
function. See Appendix A.1 for background. Let xtbe a point in the noise space
RDat time t, and v, w∈T xtRDbe tangent vectors to RDatxt. Let sθ(xt, t)
be the score function of a pre-trained diffusion model parameterized by θ. We
propose the following Riemannian metric at timet:
gxt(v, w) :=⟨J xtv, Jxtw⟩=v⊤J⊤
xtJxtw=v⊤Gxtw, (1)
where Jxt=∇xtsθ(xt, t)is the Jacobian of the score function sθ(·, t)atxt, and
Gxt=J⊤
xtJxtis the matrix representation of the metric gxt. This metric is the
pullback s∗
θIof the Euclidean metric Ion the score space RDthrough the score
function sθ, since v⊤Gxtw= (Jxtv)⊤I(Jxtw). By construction, Gxtis symmetric
and positive semi-definite; we show below that it is positive definite in practice.
Interpretation.Stanczuk et al. [85] found that the score function sθ(xt, t)
points orthogonally towards the data manifold Mtcontaining the data point
xt, and that this orthogonality becomes more prominent as tapproaches zero.
Ventura et al. [91] further investigated the Jacobian Jxtand observed that its
rank deficiency (for clean samples on a low-dimensional manifold) or spectral
gap (for real-world data) reflects the intrinsic dimension of the data manifold.
Intuitively, Jxtshrinks along tangent directions and remains large along normal
directions, as shown in Fig. 2.
More precisely, let Mtbe the data manifold at time tlearned by a diffusion
model, and xt∈ M tbe a point on the data manifold. Define the tangent space
TxtMtas the d-dimensional subspace ( d≪D) spanned by the right singular
vectors of Jxtcorresponding to small singular values; the normal space NxtMt
is the orthogonal complement spanned by those corresponding to large singular
values. Then, TxtRD=TxtMt⊕ NxtMt. From Eq. (1), the squared metric norm
of a tangent vectorvto the ambient noise spaceRDisgxt(v, v) =∥J xtv∥2
2.
Proposition 1. Among tangent vectors vof a fixed Euclidean norm, those with
the smallest squared metric norm gxt(v, v) =∥Jxtv∥2
2lie in the tangent space
TxtMtto the data manifoldM t.
Consequently, our metric assigns shorter lengths to paths that stay on or run
parallel to the data manifoldM t. See Appendix B.1 for a detailed derivation.
6 S. Saito and T. Matsubara
Geodesics.A geodesic is a shortest path under a given metric, obtained by
minimizing the energy functional E[γ](see Appendix A.1 and Lee [49] for details).
Letu∈[0,1]parameterize a curve γ:u7→γ (u). The energy functional with our
metric is:
E[γ] =1
2R1
0gγ(u)(γ′(u), γ′(u))du=1
2R1
0⟨Jγ(u)γ′(u), J γ(u)γ′(u)⟩du
=1
2R1
0∥Jγ(u)γ′(u)∥2
2du=1
2R1
0∥∂
∂usθ(γ(u), t)∥2
2du.(2)
This expression admits two complementary readings. The second-last term shows
that geodesics minimize the squared metric norm ∥Jxtv∥2
2of the velocity v=γ′(u)
at each point xt=γ(u)along the path, which by Proposition 1 encourages the
path to stay tangential to the data manifold. The last term, obtained by the
chain rule, shows that geodesics equivalently minimize the squared change in
the score function sθalong the path. Since our metric is the pullback metric
through sθ, geodesics are mapped to straight lines in the score space. Because
the score function encodes the gradient of the log-density, a path with minimal
score variation maintains a consistent relationship with the density landscape:
it neither approaches nor deviates from high-density regions, but runs parallel
to the manifold at a consistent distance. This provides a geometric explanation
for why our geodesics preserve endpoint probabilities (Fig. 1 (right)). Moreover,
considering that gradients of log-likelihoods with respect to model parameters
have been used as semantic representations of inputs [11,29,97], geodesics that
minimize score variation can also be viewed as preserving semantic closeness
between samples.
Given a geodesic, the distance between its endpoints is the length of the
geodesic, computed asd g(γ(0), γ(1)) =R1
0p
gγ(u)(γ′(u), γ′(u))du.
Theoretical Remarks.Our metric Gxt=J⊤
xtJxtcaptures the full spectral
structureoftheJacobian,thatis,alltangentandnormaldirections.Thiscontrasts
with the FIM-based metric λsθs⊤
θ+I[7], which captures only the rank-1 direction
of the score sθand thus respects only one normal direction. The distinction is
essential when the codimension of the data manifold is greater than one, which
is the typical case for real-world data (e.g., images encoded in a representation
space of tens of thousands of dimensions exhibit intrinsic dimensionality of a few
hundred [85,91]). Thus, practical diffusion models operate in a regime where the
tangent–normal distinction is meaningful.
Diffusion models learn the score function sθdirectly rather than the log-
density logp t, and consequently, Jxtis not exactly symmetric. Even then, Jxt
typically exhibits a spectral gap, and the decomposition into TxtMt⊕ NxtMtin
Proposition 1 holds approximately.
TheJacobian Jxtisdegenerateonideallycleandatalyingonalow-dimensional
manifold at t= 0, but for real-world data it is full-rank with a sharp spectral
gap. In practice, operations are performed at an intermediate time t >0, where
samples are corrupted by noise and the Jacobian Jxtis full-rank and exhibits a
moderate spectral gap, ensuring that gxtis positive definite and thus a proper
Riemannian metric.
Discovering Riemannian Metric for Diffusion Models 7
Algorithm 1Interpolation
Require: Samples x(0)
0,x(1)
0, score sθ, time τ,
pointsN, iterationsK
1:{x(0)
τ, x(1)
τ}←{DDIM-Fwd(x(i)
0, τ)}i∈{0,1}
2:{x(ui)
τ}N−1
i=1←{SLERP(x(0)
τ, x(1)
τ, ui)}N−1
i=13:fork= 1toKdo
4:ComputeEvia Eq. (3)
5:Update{x(ui)
τ}N−1
i=1to minimizeE
6:end for
7:{ˆx(ui)
0}N
i=0← {DDIM-Bwd(x(ui)
τ, τ)}N
i=0
8:return{ˆx(ui)
0}N
i=0
Fig. 3:Illustration of geodesic-based in-
terpolation
See Appendix B.1 for further details, including a discussion of regularization
and alternative construction.
3.2 From Metric to Algorithms
Geodesic-Based Interpolation.To use our metric for interpolation, we com-
pute a geodesic in the noise space at a fixed time t=τ >0by discretizing the
path and minimizing the resulting energy. We approximate the path γasN+1
points x(ui)
τwith u0= 0, uN= 1, ∆u= 1/N, and x(ui)
τ=γ(ui). The energy
functionalE[γ]in Eq. (2) is then approximated as:
E[γ]≈1
2∆uPN−1
i=0∥(sθ(x(ui+1)
τ, τ)−s θ(x(ui)
τ, τ))∥2
2. (3)
Given two samples x(0)
τandx(1)
τat time τ, the geodesic is obtained by minimizing
Eq. (3) with respect to the intermediate points x(u1)
τ, . . . , x(uN−1)
τ. The distance
is thend g(x(0)
τ, x(1)
τ)≈PN−1
i=0∥(sθ(x(ui+1)
τ, τ)−s θ(x(ui)
τ, τ))∥ 2.
This follows common practice in diffusion models, where interpolation is
performed in the noise space rather than directly in the data space at t= 0
(see Algorithm 1 and Fig. 3). Given a pair of clean samples x(0)
0andx(1)
0, we
first map them to noisy samples x(0)
τandx(1)
τat the fixed time τusing DDIM
Inversion [60]. We then compute the geodesic path between them by minimizing
Eq. (3), and map the interpolated noisy samples x(u)
τforu=u0, . . . , u Nback to
clean samples x(u)
0using the deterministic denoising process (see Appendix A.2).
Here,x(u1)
0, . . . , x(uN−1)
0serve as interpolated samples. The optimization is more
computationally expensive than closed-form methods such as LERP or SLERP,
but comparable to other metric-based methods [7,98] that also require solving
an optimization problem, as summarized in Appendices C.1 and C.2.
Metric-Based Guidance Correction.Complementary to global geodesics,
our metric also provides a local tangent–normal decomposition at each point
in the noise space. This decomposition provides a metric-based way to correct
perturbations that push a sample off the data manifold. We apply this to classifier-
free guidance (CFG), where the guidance term is known to distort the learned
manifold [17,48] (see Algorithm 2 and Fig. 4).
8 S. Saito and T. Matsubara
Algorithm 2Guidance Correction
Require:x T∼N(0, I), condition c, CFG scale
w, weightλ
1:fort=Tto1do
2:s←s θ(xt, t, c)
3:˜s←˜s θ(xt, t, c, w)▷Eq. (17)
4:∆s←˜s−s
5:Compute∆ˆs∗via Eq. (5)
6:ˆs←s+∆ˆs∗
7:x t−1←DDIMStep(x t,ˆs)
8:end for
9:returnx 0
Fig. 4:Illustration of metric-based guid-
ance correction
Diffusion models generate samples by iteratively updating a noisy sample xt
asxt−1=xt+ηtsθ(xt, t), where the noise term is omitted for simplicity, and ηt
is the update size depending on time t. CFG modifies this by adding a guidance
term ∆s(xt, c)tosθ(xt, t), where cis some condition. Our correction adjusts this
guidance term to balance two objectives: the corrected sample should remain
close to the guided sample in Euclidean distance, while staying close to the
unguided sample under our metric g, i.e., on the data manifold. Formally, we
solve:
∆ˆs∗=arg min
∆ˆsdE(xt+ηt(sθ+∆s), x t+ηt(sθ+∆ˆs))2+λd g(xt+ηtsθ, xt+ηt(sθ+∆ˆs))2,
(4)
whered Eis the Euclidean distance.
For tractability, we evaluate dgat time trather than t−1(valid because the
manifold changes smoothly between adjacent timesteps) and approximate the
path integral withN= 1(sufficient for a local correction). Absorbingη tintoλ,
the corrected guidance ∆ˆs∗is then given by( I+λGxt)∆ˆs∗=∆s. We solve this
by the conjugate gradient (CG) method with ∆sas the initial point, using only
a single update step to limit computational overhead:
∆ˆs∗=∆s+ϵ⊤ϵ
ϵ⊤(I+λG xt)ϵϵforϵ=∆s−(I+λG xt)∆s. (5)
Since Gxt=J⊤
xtJxt, multiplication by Gxtcan be decomposed into a Jacobian-
vector product followed by a vector-Jacobian product. We approximate the
Jacobian-vector product Jxtvvia a finite difference( sθ(xt+hv, t)−sθ(xt, t))/h
for a small h > 0, and approximate the vector-Jacobian product J⊤
xtvin the
same way under the empirically supported assumption that Jxtis approximately
symmetric. In total, the correction requires four additional evaluations of sθ.
With CFG or negative prompt, each denoising step involves two evaluations of sθ,
so the computational cost is approximately three times that without correction.
Since our correction modifies only the guidance term, it can be applied during
distillation, so that the improved quality is inherited by the student model at no
additional inference cost.
Discovering Riemannian Metric for Diffusion Models 9
4 Experiments
Our primary contribution is the Riemannian metric defined in Eq. (1). To validate
that it faithfully captures the geometry of the data manifold, we examine its
global properties through interpolation (Secs. 4.1 to 4.3) and its local properties
through guidance correction (Sec. 4.4).
4.1 Synthetic 2D Data
Toillustratethebehaviorofgeodesicsunderourmetric,weconductedexperiments
on a synthetic C-shaped distribution in 2D (see Fig. 1 and Appendix D.1 for
details). We trained a DDPM [33] with a SiLU MLP backbone [19] on 100,000
samples from this distribution with T= 50steps and obtained interpolations at
τ= 0.02T= 1via DDIM Inversion. As shown in Fig. 1 (left), LERP traverses
through low-density regions, SLERP slightly deviates from the manifold, and
density-based interpolation [98] approaches a high-density region, not preserving
the endpoint probabilities. In contrast, our geodesic runs parallel to the data
manifold, preserving the endpoint probabilities.
Table 1:Resultson
synthetic 2D data
Method Std.↓
LERP 0.1606
SLERP 0.0833
Density 0.1073
Ours0.0701To quantify this, we sampled 50 pairs of endpoints
and evaluated the standard deviation of the density
p(x)along each interpolation path, summarized in
Tab. 1. A smaller value indicates a more consistent
distance from the data manifold. Our metric achieves
the lowest standard deviation, which confirms that
geodesics under our metric maintain a consistent re-
lationship with the manifold, as predicted by the
analysis in Sec. 3.
4.2 Image Interpolation
Experimental Setup.Following prior work [74,98,102], we use Stable Diffusion
v2.1-base [73] as the backbone with T= 50timesteps and N−1 = 9interpolated
images.WedonotuseCFGornegativepromptsforDDIMinversionanddenoising.
For the geodesic computation, we use negative prompts and treat the resulting
update ˜sθ(i.e., Eq. (18) in Appendix A.2) as the score function sθfor computing
the Jacobian Jxtand thus the metric gxt. We evaluate on four benchmark
datasets: the animation and metamorphosis subsets of MorphBench (MB(A) and
MB(M)) [100], Animal Faces-HQ (AF) [16], and CelebA-HQ (CA) [41]. For AF
and CA, we curate 50 image pairs with LPIPS [101] below 0.6 to ensure semantic
similarity, following Yu et al. [98]. Further details are provided in Appendix D.2.
We compare against LERP [33], SLERP [81], NAO [74], NoiseDiffusion
(NoiseDiff) [102], FIM-based metric [7], and GeodesicDiffusion (GeoDiff) [98].
We use default settings for NAO, NoiseDiff, and GeoDiff based on their official
codes. Due to the lack of official code, we re-implemented the FIM-based metric
with the same backbone as ours. For fair comparison, LERP, SLERP, FIM-based
metric, and our proposed metric use the DDIM Scheduler [81] and operate in
10 S. Saito and T. Matsubara
the noise space at τ= 0.6T, following Yu et al. [98]. For FIM-based metric and
our proposed metric, each path was initialized with SLERP and updated for 500
iterations using Adam optimizer [45] with a learning rate of10−3, decayed with
cosine annealing to10−4[56]. We also adopted the prompt adjustment of Yu et
al. [98], which optimizes the text embedding similarly to textual inversion [21]; see
Appendices C.1, C.2, and C.3 for details on comparison methods, computational
overhead, and prompt adjustment.
We evaluate interpolation quality using four measures. (1) Perceptual Path
Length (PPL) [42] is the sum of LPIPS between adjacent images, assessing the
directness of transitions. (2) Perceptual Distance Variance (PDV) [100] is the
standard deviation of adjacent LPIPS, assessing the uniformity of transitions.
(3)FréchetInceptionDistance(FID)[32]isadistributionaldistancebetweeninput
and interpolated images via the features of Inception v3 [87]. (4) Reconstruction
Error (RE) is the mean squared error between the input endpoints and the
reconstructed endpoints. PPL, PDV, and FID are standard measures for image
interpolation [74,98,102]; we additionally report RE to verify whether the
endpoints are faithfully preserved. We follow the evaluation protocol of prior
work, including the sample sizes for FID computation (900 interpolated images
vs. 200 reference images on AF and CA). While none of these measures directly
evaluates manifold faithfulness, consistent improvement across all four provides
converging evidence. We further complement these indirect measures with ground-
truth evaluation in video frame interpolation (Sec. 4.3).
Results.We summarize the quantitative results in Tab. 2. Our metric achieves
the best scores on all datasets for PPL, FID, and RE, and records the best PDV
on MB(A) with a close second-best on the others.
Qualitative results in Figs. 5 and 6 reveal further differences. LERP yields
blurry interpolations. NAO and NoiseDiff produce vivid textures absent in the
originals and exhibit large reconstruction errors, as their norm adjustments alter
the endpoints. SLERP produces sharper results than LERP but lags behind
geodesic-based methods. The most competitive baseline is GeoDiff, which ranks
second on most metrics but produces over-smoothed images that lack fine details.
Thisisconsistentwiththefindingthatsampledensityisnegativelycorrelatedwith
perceptual detail [39]: density-based metrics guide geodesics toward high-density
regions, sacrificing texture. FIM-based metric yields cartoonish results with non-
smooth transitions, as it is nearly singular (rank-1) with the default λ= 1,000.
In contrast, our metric preserves fine details of the input images throughout the
interpolation. We confirmed that these trends hold with a different backbone
(Stable Diffusion v2.0-base); see Appendix E for complementary results, including
ablation studies and visualizations of the spectral gap.
4.3 Video Frame Interpolation
Experimental Setup.To complement the indirect measures of the previous
section, we evaluate methods on video frame interpolation using MSE and LPIPS
