Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains
via GPLVM on Hyperbolic Manifolds
No´emie Jaquier1Leonel Rozo2Miguel Gonz ´alez-Duque3Viacheslav Borovitskiy4Tamim Asfour1
Abstract
Human motion taxonomies serve as high-level hi-
erarchical abstractions that classify how humans
move and interact with their environment. They
have proven useful to analyse grasps, manipula-
tion skills, and whole-body support poses. De-
spite substantial efforts devoted to design their
hierarchy and underlying categories, their use
remains limited. This may be attributed to the
lack of computational models that fill the gap be-
tween the discrete hierarchical structure of the tax-
onomy and the high-dimensional heterogeneous
data associated to its categories. To overcome
this problem, we propose to model taxonomy data
via hyperbolic embeddings that capture the as-
sociated hierarchical structure. We achieve this
by formulating a novel Gaussian process hyper-
bolic latent variable model that incorporates the
taxonomy structure through graph-based priors
on the latent space and distance-preserving back
constraints. We validate our model on three differ-
ent human motion taxonomies to learn hyperbolic
embeddings that faithfully preserve the original
graph structure. We show that our model properly
encodes unseen data from existing or new taxon-
omy categories, and outperforms its Euclidean
and V AE-based counterparts. Finally, through
proof-of-concept experiments, we show that our
model may be used to generate realistic trajecto-
ries between the learned embeddings.
1. Introduction
Robotic systems or virtual characters that exhibit human-
or animal-like capabilities are often inspired by biological
insights (Siciliano & Khatib, 2016). In the particular context
of motion generation, it is first necessary to understand how
1Karlsruhe Institute of Technology2Bosch Center for Artificial
Intelligence3University of Copenhagen4ETH Z ¨urich. Correspon-
dence to: No ´emie Jaquier <noemie.jaquier@kit.edu >.
Proceedings of the 41stInternational Conference on Machine
Learning , Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).humans move and interact with their environment to then
generate biologically-inspired motions and behaviors of
robotic hands, arms, humanoids, or animated characters.
In this endeavor, researchers have proposed to structure
and categorize human hand grasps and body poses into
hierarchical classifications known as taxonomies . Their
structure depends on the sensory variables considered to
categorize human motions and the interactions with the
environment, as well as on associated qualitative measures.
Different taxonomies have been proposed in the area of hu-
man and robot grasping (Cutkosky, 1989; Feix et al., 2016;
Abbasi et al., 2016; Stival et al., 2019). Feix et al. (2016) in-
troduced a hand grasp taxonomy whose structure was mainly
defined by the hand pose and the type of contact with the
object. As such taxonomy heavily depends on subjective
qualitative measures, Stival et al. (2019) proposed a quan-
titative tree-like hand grasp taxonomy based on muscular
and kinematic patterns. A similar data-driven approach was
used to design a grasp taxonomy based on contact forces
in (Abbasi et al., 2016). Bullock et al. (2013) introduced a
hand-centric manipulation taxonomy that classifies manipu-
lation skills according to the type of contact with the objects
and the object motion imparted by the hand. A different
strategy was developed by Paulius et al. (2019), who de-
signed a manipulation taxonomy based on a categorization
of contacts and motion trajectories. Humanoid robotics also
made significant efforts to analyze human motions, thus
proposing taxonomies as high-level abstractions of human
motion configurations. For example, Borr `as et al. (2017)
analyzed the contacts between the human limbs and the en-
vironment to design a whole-body support pose taxonomy.
Besides their analytical purpose in biomechanics or robotics,
some of the aforementioned taxonomies were employed
for modeling grasp actions (Romero et al., 2010; Lin &
Sun, 2015), for planning contact-aware whole-body pose
sequences (Mandery et al., 2016a), and for learning manip-
ulation skills embeddings (Paulius et al., 2020). However,
despite most of these taxonomies carry a well-defined hi-
erarchical structure, it was often overlooked. First, these
taxonomies were usually employed for classification tasks
where only the tree leaves were used to define target classes,
disregarding the full taxonomy structure (Feix et al., 2016;
1arXiv:2210.01672v5  [cs.RO]  15 Sep 2024
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
Abbasi et al., 2016). Second, the discrete representation
of the taxonomy categories hindered their use for motion
generation (Romero et al., 2010).
Arguably the main difficulty of leveraging human motion
taxonomies is the lack of computational models that exploit
(i)the domain knowledge encoded in the hierarchy, and (ii)
the information of the high-dimensional data associated to
the taxonomy categories. We tackle this problem from a
representation learning perspective by modeling taxonomy
data as embeddings that capture the associated hierarchical
structure. Inspired by the pioneer work of Krioukov et al.
(2010) on the use of hyperbolic geometry on complex hierar-
chies, and by recent advances on hierarchical representation
learning (Nickel & Kiela, 2017; 2018; Mathieu et al., 2019;
Montanaro et al., 2022), we propose to leverage the hyper-
bolic manifold (Ratcliffe, 2019) to learn such embeddings.
An important property of the hyperbolic manifold is that
distances grow exponentially when moving away from the
origin, and shortest paths between distant points tend to pass
through it, resembling a continuous hierarchical structure .
Therefore, we hypothesize that the geometry of the hyper-
bolic manifold allows us to learn embeddings that comply
with the hierarchical structure of human motion taxonomies.
In this paper we propose a Gaussian process hyperbolic
latent variable model (GPHLVM) to learn embeddings of
taxonomy data on the hyperbolic manifold. Our first con-
tribution tackles the challenges that arise when imposing a
hyperbolic geometry to the latent space of the well-known
GPLVM (Lawrence, 2003; Titsias & Lawrence, 2010), a
model that has been successfully applied in human pose
estimation and motion generation (Lawrence & Qui ˜nonero
Candela, 2006; Urtasun et al., 2008; Gupta et al., 2008; Ding
& Fan, 2015; Lalchand et al., 2022b), and in complex set-
tings such as robotic dressing assistants (Nishanth Koganti
& Ikeda, 2019). Specifically, we reformulate the Gaus-
sian distribution, the kernel, and the optimization process
of the GPLVM to account for the geometry of the hyper-
bolic latent space. To do so, we leverage the hyperbolic
wrapped Gaussian distribution (Nagano et al., 2019), and
provide a positive-definite-guaranteed approximation of the
hyperbolic kernel proposed by McKean (1970). Moreover,
we resort to Riemannian optimization (Absil et al., 2007;
Boumal, 2023) to optimize the GPHLVM embeddings. Our
GPHLVM is conceptually similar to the GPLVM for Lie
groups (Jensen et al., 2020), which also imposes geometric
properties to the GPLVM latent space. However, our formu-
lation is specifically designed for the hyperbolic manifold
and fully built on tools from Riemannian geometry. More-
over, unlike (Tosi et al., 2014) and (Jørgensen & Hauberg,
2021), where the latent space was endowed with a pullback
Riemannian metric learned via the GPLVM mapping, we
impose the hyperbolic geometry to the GPHLVM latent
space as an inductive bias to comply with the hierarchicalstructure of taxonomy data. As a second contribution , we
introduce mechanisms to enforce the taxonomy structure
in the learned embeddings through graph-based priors on
the latent space and via graph-distance-preserving back con-
straints (Lawrence & Qui ˜nonero Candela, 2006; Urtasun
et al., 2008).
We validate our approach on three distinct human motion
taxonomies: a bimanual manipulation taxonomy (Krebs
& Asfour, 2022), a hand grasps taxonomy (Stival et al.,
2019), and a whole-body support pose taxonomy (Borr `as
et al., 2017). The proposed GPHLVM successfully learns
hyperbolic embeddings that comply with the original graph
structure of all the considered taxonomies, and it properly
encodes unseen poses from existing or new taxonomy nodes.
Moreover, we show how we can exploit the continuous
geometry of the hyperbolic manifold to generate trajectories
between different embeddings pairs via geodesic paths in
the latent space. We leverage this to, for example, generate
realistic trajectories that are competitive with state-of-the-art
character animation, while being trained at low data regimes.
Our results show that GPHLVM consistently outperforms
its Euclidean and V AE-based counterparts. The source code
and video accompanying the paper are available at https:
//sites.google.com/view/gphlvm/ .
2. Background
Gaussian Process Latent Variable Models: A GPLVM
defines a generative mapping from latent variables
{xn}N
n=1,xn∈RQto observations {yn}N
n=1,yn∈RDby
modeling the corresponding non-linear transformation with
Gaussian processes (GPs) (Lawrence, 2003). The GPLVM
is described as,
yn,d∼ N(yn,d;fn,d, σ2
d)
with fn,d∼GP(md(xn), kd(xn,xn)),
andxn∼ N(0,I),(1)
where yn,ddenotes the d-th dimension of the observation yn,
md(·) :RQ→Randkd(·,·) :RQ×RQ→Rare the GP
mean and kernel function, respectively, and σ2
dis a hyper-
parameter. Conventionally, the hyperparameters and latent
variables of the GPLVM were optimized using maximum
likelihood ormaximum a posteriori (MAP) estimates. As
this does not scale gracefully to large datasets, contemporary
methods use inducing points and variational approximations
of the evidence (Titsias & Lawrence, 2010). In contrast to
neural-network-based generative models, GPLVMs are data
efficient and provide automatic uncertainty quantification.
Riemannian geometry: To understand the hyperbolic
manifold, it is necessary to first define some basic Rieman-
nian geometry concepts (Lee, 2018). To begin with, consider
a Riemannian manifold M, which is a locally Euclidean
topological space with a globally-defined differential struc-
ture. For each point x∈ M , there exists a tangent space
2
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
Figure 1: Left: Illustration of the Lorentz L2and Poincar ´eP2models of the hyperbolic manifold. The former is depicted as the gray
hyperboloid, while the latter is represented by the blue circle. Both models show a geodesic ( ) between two points x1() andx2().
The vector u( ) lies on the tangent space of x1such that u=Logx1(x2).Right: Hand grasp taxonomy (Stival et al., 2019) used in
one of our experiments. Grasp types are organized in a tree structure based on their muscular and kinematic properties. Each leaf node of
the tree is a hand grasp type. The lines represent the depth of the leaves, e.g., PEandIEare at distance 2and3from the root node.
TxMthat is a vector space consisting of the tangent vectors
of all the possible smooth curves passing through x. A Rie-
mannian manifold is equipped with a Riemannian metric,
which permits to define curve lengths in M. Shortest-path
curves, called geodesics, can be seen as the generalization
of straight lines on the Euclidean space to Riemannian man-
ifolds, as they are minimum-length curves between two
points in M. To operate with Riemannian manifolds, it is
common practice to exploit the Euclidean tangent spaces. To
do so, we resort to mappings back and forth between TxM
andM, which are the exponential and logarithmic maps.
The exponential map Expx(u) :TxM → M maps a point
uin the tangent space of xto a point yon the manifold, so
that it lies on the geodesic starting at xin the direction u,
and such that the geodesic distance dMbetween xandy
equals the distance between xandu. The inverse operation
is the logarithmic map Logx(u) :M → T xM. Finally, the
parallel transport Px→y 
u
:TxM → T yMoperates with
manifold elements lying on different tangent spaces.
Hyperbolic manifold: The hyperbolic space Hdis the
unique simply-connected complete d-dimensional Rieman-
nian manifold with a constant negative sectional curva-
ture (Ratcliffe, 2019). There are several isometric models
for the hyperbolic space, in particular, the Poincar ´e ballPd
and the Lorentz (hyperboloid) model Ld(see Fig. 1- left).
The latter representation is chosen here as it is numerically
more stable than the former, and thus better suited for Rie-
mannian optimization (see App. A.1 for the principal Rie-
mannian operations and their illustration on the Lorentz
model). However, the Poincar ´e model provides a more intu-
itive representation and is here used for visualization. This
is easily achieved by leveraging the isometric mapping be-
tween both models (see App. A.2 for details). An important
property of the hyperbolic manifold is the exponential rate
of the volume growth of a ball with respect to its radius. In
other words, distances in Hdgrow exponentially when mov-
ing away from the origin, and shortest paths between distant
points on the manifold tend to pass through the origin, re-
sembling a continuous hierarchical structure. Because of
this, the hyperbolic manifold is often exploited to embed
hierarchical data such as trees or graphs (Nickel & Kiela,2017; Chami et al., 2020). Although its potential to em-
bed discrete data structures into a continuous space is well
known in the machine learning community, its application
in motion analysis and generation is presently scarce.
Hyperbolic wrapped Gaussian distribution: Probabilis-
tic models on Riemannian manifolds demand to work with
probability distributions that consider the manifold geom-
etry. We use the hyperbolic wrapped distribution (Nagano
et al., 2019), which builds on a Gaussian distribution on the
tangent space at the origin µ0= (1,0, . . . , 0)TofLd, that
is then projected onto the hyperbolic space after transporting
the tangent space to the desired location. Intuitively, the
construction of this wrapped distribution is as follows (see
also Fig. 6): (1)sample a point ˜v∈Rdfrom the Euclidean
normal distribution N(0,Σ),(2)transform ˜vto an element
ofTµ0Ld⊂Rd+1by setting v= (0,˜v)T,(3)apply the
parallel transport u= Pµ0→µ 
v
, and (4)project utoLd
via Expµ(u). The resulting probability density function is,
logNLd(x;µ,Σ) = log N(v;0,Σ) (2)
−(d−1) log (sinh( ∥u∥L)/∥u∥L),
withv= Pµ→µ0 
u
,u=Logµ(x), and∥u∥2
L=⟨u,u⟩µ.
The hyperbolic wrapped distribution (Nagano et al., 2019)
has a more general expression given in (Skopek et al., 2020).
3. The proposed GPHLVM
We present the GPHLVM, that extends GPLVM to hyper-
bolic latent spaces. A GPHLVM defines a generative map-
ping from the hyperbolic latent space LQto the observation
space, e.g., the data associated to the taxonomy, based on
GPs. By considering independent GPs across the observa-
tion dimensions, the GPHLVM is formally described as,
yn,d∼ N(yn,d;fn,d, σ2
d)
with fn,d∼GP(md(xn), kLQ
d(xn,xn))
andxn∼ NLQ(µ0, αI),(3)
where yn,ddenotes the d-th dimension of the observation
yn∈RDandxn∈ LQis the corresponding latent variable.
Our GPHLVM is built on hyperbolic GPs, characterized by
3
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
a mean function md(·) :LQ→R(usually set to 0), and
a kernel kLQ
d(·,·) :LQ× LQ→R. These kernels encode
similarity information in the latent hyperbolic manifold and
should reflect its geometry to perform effectively, as de-
tailed in §. 3.1. Also, the latent variable x∈ LQis assigned
a hyperbolic wrapped Gaussian prior NLQ(µ0, αI)based
on(2), where µ0is the origin of LQ, and the parameter α
controls the spread of the latent variables in LQ. As Eu-
clidean GPLVMs, our GPHLVM can be trained by finding
a MAP estimate or via variational inference. However, spe-
cial care must be taken to guarantee that the latent variables
belong to the hyperbolic manifold, as explained in §. 3.2.
3.1. Hyperbolic kernels
For GPs in Euclidean spaces, the squared exponential (SE)
and Mat ´ern kernels are standard choices (Rasmussen &
Williams, 2006). In the modern machine learning literature
these were generalized to non-Euclidean spaces such as
manifolds (Borovitskiy et al., 2020; Jaquier et al., 2021)
or graphs (Borovitskiy et al., 2021). The generalized SE
kernels can be connected to the much studied heat kernels .
These are given (cf. Grigoryan & Noguchi (1998)) by,
kL2(x,x′) =σ2
C∞Z∞
ρse−s2/(2κ2)
(cosh( s)−cosh( ρ))1/2ds,(4)
kL3(x,x′) =σ2
C∞ρ
sinhρe−ρ2/(2κ2), (5)
where ρ= dist Ld(x,x′)is the geodesic distance between
x,x′∈ Ld,κandσ2are the kernel lengthscale and vari-
ance, and C∞is a normalizing constant. To the best of our
knowledge, no closed form expression for L2is known. In
this case, the kernel is approximated via a discretization
of the integral. One appealing option is the Monte Carlo
approximation based on the truncated Gaussian density. Un-
fortunately, such approximations easily fail to be positive
semidefinite if the number of samples is not very large. We
address this via an alternative Monte Carlo approximation,
kL2(x,x′)≈σ2
C′∞1
LLX
l=1sltanh( πsl)ww, (6)
where⟨xP,b⟩=1
2log1−|xP|2
|xP−b|2is the hyperbolic outer prod-
uct with xPbeing the representation of xas a point on
the Poincar ´e disk P2=D,w=e(2sli+1)⟨xP,bl⟩with
i,zdenoting the imaginary unit and complex conjuga-
tion, respectively, bli.i.d.∼U(T)withTthe unit circle, and
sli.i.d.∼e−s2κ2/21[0,∞)(s). The distributions of blandslare
easy to sample from: The former is sampled by applying
x→e2πixtox∼U([0,1])and the latter is (proportional
to) a truncated normal distribution. Importantly, the right-
hand side of (6)is easily recognized to be an inner product
in the space CL, which implies its positive semidefiniteness.Notice that we leverage the isometry between Lorentz and
Poincar ´e models (see App. A) for computing the kernel (6)
(see App. B for details on (6)). Note that hyperbolic kernels
forLQwithQ > 3are generally defined as integrals of
the kernels (4)(Grigoryan & Noguchi, 1998). Analogs of
Mat´ern kernels for LQare obtained as integral of the SE
kernel of the same dimension (Jaquier et al., 2021).
3.2. Model training
As in the Euclidean case, training the GPHLVM is equiva-
lent to finding optimal latent variables X={xn}N
n=1and
hyperparameters Θ={θd}D
d=1by solving argmaxX,Θℓ,
withxn∈ LQ,θdbeing the hyperparameters of the d-th GP,
andℓas a loss function. We introduce a GPHLVM trained
via MAP estimation for small datasets and a variational
GPHLVM that handles larger datasets, providing users with
the most appropriate tool for their needs. Note that recent
extensions of GPLVM (Lalchand et al., 2022a;b) scale to
massively large datasets via stochastic variational inference.
For small datasets, the GPHLVM can be trained by maxi-
mizing the log posterior, i.e., ℓMAP= log 
p(Y|X)p(X)
withY= (y1. . .yN)TandX= (x1. . .xN)T. For large
datasets, the GPHLVM can be trained, similarly to the
so-called Bayesian GPLVM (Titsias & Lawrence, 2010),
by maximizing the marginal likelihood of the data, i.e.,
ℓV A= log p(Y) = logR
p(Y|X)p(X)dX. As this quan-
tity is intractable, it is approximated via variational inference
by adapting the methodology of Titsias & Lawrence (2010)
to hyperbolic latent spaces, as explained next. Correspond-
ing algorithms are provided in App. D.
Variational inference: We approximate the posterior
p(X|Y)by a variational distribution defined as a hyper-
bolic wrapped normal distribution over the latent variables,
qϕ(X) =NY
n=1NLQ(xn;µn,Σn), (7)
with variational parameters ϕ={µn,Σn}N
n=1, withµn∈
LQandΣn∈ TµnLQ. Similarly to the Euclidean case (Tit-
sias & Lawrence, 2010), this variational distribution allows
the formulation of a lower bound,
logp(Y)≥Eqϕ(X)[logp(Y|X)]−KL 
qϕ(X)||p(X)
.
(8)
The KL divergence KL 
qϕ(X)||p(X)
between two hyper-
bolic wrapped normal distributions can easily be evaluated
via Monte-Carlo sampling (see App. C.1 for details). More-
over, the expectation Eqϕ(X)[logp(Y|X)]can be decom-
posed into individual terms for each observation dimension
asPD
d=1Eqϕ(X)[logp(yd|X)], where ydis the d-th col-
umn of Y. For large datasets, each term can be evaluated
via a variational sparse GP approximation (Titsias, 2009;
Hensman et al., 2015). To do so, we introduce Minduc-
ing inputs {zd,m}M
m=1withzd,m∈ LQfor each observa-
tion dimension d, whose corresponding inducing variables
4
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
{ud,m}M
m=1are defined as noiseless observations of the
GP in (3), i.e, ud∼GP(md(zd), kLQ
d(zd,zd)). Similar
to (Hensman et al., 2015), we can write,
logp(yd|X)≥Eqλ(fd)
logN(yd;fd(X), σ2
d)
−KL 
qλ(ud)||p(ud|Zd)
,(9)
where we defined qλ(fd) =R
p(fd|ud)qλ(ud)dudwith
the variational distribution qλ(ud) =N(ud;˜µd,˜Σd), and
variational parameters λ={˜µd,˜Σd}D
d=1. Remember that
the inducing variables ud,mare Euclidean, i.e., the varia-
tional distribution qλ(ud)is a Euclidean Gaussian and the
KL divergence in (9)has a closed-form solution. In this
case, the training parameters of the GPHLVM are the set
of inducing inputs {zd,m}M
m=1, the variational parameters
ϕandλ, and the hyperparameters Θ(see App. C.2 for the
derivation of the GPHLVM variational inference process).
Optimization: As several training parameters of the
GPHLVM belong to LQ, i.e., the latent variables xnfor
the MAP estimation, or the inducing inputs zd,mand means
µnfor variational inference, we need to account for their
hyperbolic geometry during optimization. To do so, we
leverage Riemannian optimization methods (Absil et al.,
2007; Boumal, 2023) to train the GPHLVM. Each step of
first order (stochastic) Riemannian optimization methods is
generally of the form,
ηt←h 
gradℓ(xt),τt−1
,
xt+1←Expxt(−αtηt),
τt←Pxt→xt+1 
ηt
.(10)
The update ηt∈ TxtMis first computed as a function
hof the Riemannian gradient grad of the loss ℓ(xt)and
ofτt−1, the previous update that is parallel-transported to
the tangent space of the new estimate xt. The estimate
xtis then updated by projecting the update ηtscaled by
a learning rate αtonto the manifold using the exponential
map. The function his equivalent to computing the update
of the Euclidean algorithm, e.g., ηt←gradℓ(xt)for a
simple gradient descent. Notice that (10) is applied on a
product of manifolds when optimizing several parameters.
In this paper, we used the Riemannian Adam (B ´ecigneul
& Ganea, 2019) implemented in Geoopt (Kochurov et al.,
2020) to optimize the GPHLVM parameters.
4. Incorporating Taxonomy Knowledge
While we are now able to learn hyperbolic embeddings of
the data associated to a taxonomy using our GPHLVM, they
do not necessarily follow the taxonomy graph structure. In
other words, the manifold distances between pairs of em-
beddings do not necessarily match the graph distances. To
overcome this, we introduce graph-distance information as
inductive bias to learn the embeddings. To do so, we lever-
age two well-known techniques in the GPLVM literature:priors on the embeddings and back constraints (Lawrence
& Qui ˜nonero Candela, 2006; Urtasun et al., 2008). Both are
reformulated to preserve the taxonomy graph structure in
the hyperbolic latent space as a function of the node-to-node
shortest paths.
Graph-distance priors: As shown by Urtasun et al.
(2008), the structure of the latent space can be modified
by adding priors of the form p(X)∝e−ϕ(X)/σ2
ϕto the
GPLVM, where ϕ(X)is a function that we aim at minimiz-
ing. Incorporating such a prior may also be alternatively
understood as augmenting the GPLVM loss ℓwith a regu-
larization term −ϕ(X). Therefore, we propose to augment
the loss of the GPHLVM with a distance-preserving graph-
based regularizer. Several such losses have been proposed
in the literature, see (Cruceru et al., 2021) for a review.
Specifically, we define ϕ(X)as the stress loss,
ℓstress(X) =X
i<j 
distG(ci, cj)−distLQ(xi,xj)2,(11)
where cidenotes the taxonomy node to which the observa-
tionyibelongs, and distG,distLQare the taxonomy graph
distance and the geodesic distance on LQ, respectively. The
loss(11) encourages the preservation of all distances of the
taxonomy graph in LQ. It therefore acts globally , thus al-
lowing the complete taxonomy structure to be reflected by
the GPHLVM. Notice that Cruceru et al. (2021) also survey
a distortion loss that encourages the distance of the embed-
dings to match the graph distance by considering their ratio.
However, this distortion loss is only properly defined when
the embeddings xiandxjcorrespond to different classes
ci̸=cj. Interestingly, our empirical results using this loss
were lackluster and numerically unstable (see App. F).
Back-constraints: The back-constrained GPLVM
(Lawrence & Qui ˜nonero Candela, 2006) defines the
latent variables as a function of the observations, i.e.,
xn,q=gq(y1. . . ,yn;wq)with parameters {wq}Q
q=1. This
allows us to incorporate new observations in the latent
space after training, while preserving local similarities
between observations in the embeddings. To incorporate
graph-distance information into the GPHLVM and ensure
that latent variables lie on the hyperbolic manifold, we
propose the back-constraints mapping,
xn=Expµ0(˜xn)
with ˜xn,q=NX
m=1wq,mkRD(yn,ym)kG(cn, cm).(12)
The mapping (12) not only expresses the similarities be-
tween data in the observation space via the kernel kRJ, but
encodes the relationships between data belonging to nearby
taxonomy nodes via kG. In other words, similar observa-
tions associated to the same (or near) taxonomy nodes will
5
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
be close to each other in the resulting latent space. The
kernel kGis a Mat ´ern kernel on the taxonomy graph follow-
ing the formulation introduced in (Borovitskiy et al., 2021),
which accounts for the graph geometry (see also App. E).
We also use a Euclidean SE kernel for kRD. Notice that the
back constraints only incorporate local information into the
latent embedding. Therefore, to preserve the global graph
structure, we pair the proposed back-constrained GPHLVM
with the stress prior (11). Note that both kernels are re-
quired in (12): By defining the mapping as a function of the
graph kernel only, the observations of each taxonomy node
would be encoded by a single latent point. When using the
observation kernel only, dissimilar observations of the same
taxonomy node would be distant in the latent space, despite
the additional stress prior, as kRD(yn,ym)≈0.
5. Experiments
We test the proposed GPHLVM on three distinct robotics
taxonomies. First, we model the data from the bimanual
manipulation taxonomy (Krebs & Asfour, 2022), that is
a simple binary tree whose nodes represent coordination
patterns of human bimanual manipulation skills. We use
a balanced dataset of 60whole-body poses extracted from
recordings of bimanual household activities, as in (Krebs &
Asfour, 2022). Each pose is a vector of joint angles yn∈
R86. Second, we consider a hand grasp taxonomy (Stival
et al., 2019) that organizes common grasp types into a tree
structure based on their muscular and kinematic properties
(see Fig. 1- right ). We use 94grasps of 19types obtained
from recordings of humans grasping different objects. Each
grasp is encoded by a vector of wrist and finger joint angles
yn∈R24. Third, we model data from the whole-body
support pose taxonomy (Borr `as et al., 2017). Each node
of this taxonomy graph is a support pose defined by its
contacts, so that the distance between nodes can be viewed
as the number of contact changes required to go from a
support pose to another. We use standing and kneeling poses
of the datasets in (Mandery et al., 2016a) and (Langenstein,
2020). The former were extracted from recordings of a
human walking without hand support, or using supports
from a handrail or from a table on one side or on both sides.
The latter were obtained from a human standing up from
a kneeling position. Each pose is identified with a node of
the graph of Fig. 9. We test our approach on an unbalanced
dataset of 100poses ( 72standing and 28kneeling poses),
where each pose is represented by a vector of joint angles
yn∈R44. Note that we augment the taxonomy to explicitly
distinguish between left and right contacts. The main results
are analyzed in the sequel, while additional experimental
details, results, and comparisons are given in App. G and H.
Implementation details: App. G.1 and App. G.2 describe
the data and hyperparameters used for all experiments. We
used the hyperbolic SE kernels of § 3.1 for the GPHLVMs,and the classical SE kernel for the Euclidean models. As
GPLVMs are generally prone to local optima during training,
they benefit from a good initialization (Bitzer & Williams,
2010; Ko & Fox, 2011). Here, we initialize the embeddings
of all GPLVMs by minimizing the stress associated with
their taxonomy nodes, so that X= min Xℓstresswithℓstress
as in (11), using the hyperbolic and Euclidean distance for
the GPHLVMs and GPLVMs, respectively (see App. G.2.2).
Since our experiments deal with low-data scenarios, all
models were trained via MAP estimation by maximizing the
lossℓ=ℓMAP−γℓstress, where γis a parameter balancing
the two losses (see App. G.2.3 for details).
Hyperbolic embeddings of taxonomy data: We em-
bed the taxonomy data of the aforementioned taxonomies
into2-dimensional hyperbolic and Euclidean spaces using
GPHLVM and GPLVM. For each, we test the model without
regularization, with stress prior, and with back-constraints
coupled with stress prior. Figures 2a-2c, 3a-3c, and 11a-
11c show the learned embeddings alongside error matrices
depicting the difference between geodesic and taxonomy
graph distances for the bimanual manipulation, hand grasps,
and support pose taxonomies, respectively. As shown in
Figs. 2a, 3a, 11a, the models without regularization do not
encode any meaningful distance structure in latent space. In
contrast, the models with stress prior result in embeddings
that comply with the taxonomy graph structure: The embed-
dings are grouped and organized according to the taxonomy
nodes, the geodesic distances match the graph ones, and ar-
guably more so in the hyperbolic case (see error matrices in
Figs. 2b-2c, 3b-3c, 11b-11c). Moreover, the GPHLVM with
back constraints further organizes the embeddings inside a
class according to the similarity between their observations
(see Figs. 2c, 3c, 11c). Note that augmenting the support
pose taxonomy leads to several groups of the same support
pose in Figs. 11b-11c, e.g., Fsplits into LFandRF.
A quantitative comparison of the stress values of the latent
embeddings with respect to the graph distances confirms that
a hyperbolic geometry captures better the data structure (see
Table 1). All regularized GPHLVMs with 2-dimensional
latent spaces outperform their Euclidean counterparts. In
general, we observe a prominent stress reduction for the
Euclidean and hyperbolic 3-dimensional latent spaces com-
pared to the 2-dimensional ones. This is due to the in-
crease of volume available to match the graph structure in
3-dimensional spaces relative to 2-dimensional ones. In-
terestingly, the hyperbolic models of the bimanual manip-
ulation and hand grasps taxonomies also outperform the
Euclidean models with 3-dimensional latent spaces (see
models in App. G.5). This is due to the fact that the volume
of balls in hyperbolic space increases exponentially with
respect to the radius of the ball rather than polynomially as
in Euclidean space, which translates to significantly more
space for embedding tree-like data with minimal distortion.
6
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
(a) Vanilla
 (b) Stress prior
 (c) BC + stress prior
 (d) Adding poses
 (e) Adding a class
Figure 2: Bimanual manipulation categories: The first and last two rows show the latent embeddings and examples of interpolating
geodesics in P2andR2, followed by pairwise error matrices between geodesic and taxonomy graph distances. Background colors indicate
the GPLVM uncertainty. Added poses (d)and classes TCA right(e)are marked with stars and highlighted with red in the error matrices.
(a) Vanilla
 (b) Stress prior
 (c) BC + stress prior
 (d) Adding poses
 (e) Adding a class
Figure 3: Grasps: The first and last two rows show the latent embeddings and examples of interpolating geodesics in P2andR2, followed
by pairwise error matrices between geodesic and graph distances. Embeddings colors match those of Fig. 1- right , and background colors
indicate the GPLVM uncertainty. Added poses (d)and classes Qu,St,MW,andRi(e)are marked with stars and highlighted with red in
the error matrices.
7
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
Table 1: Average stress per geometry and regularization. The stress is computed using (11) and averaged over all pairs of training
embeddings. For models with unseen poses and classes, the stress is computed over all pairs of training and additional embeddings. Lower
stress values indicate better compliance with the taxonomy structure.
TAXONOMY MODEL NO REGULARIZER STRESS BC + S TRESS UNSEEN POSES UNSEEN CLASS
BIMANUAL
MANIPULATION
CATEGORIESGPLVM, R22.03±2.15 0 .13±0.33 0 .15±0.31 0 .15±0.29 0.08±0.11
GPHLVM, L20.98±1.26 0 .11±0.33 0 .09±0.12 0 .09±0.11 0.13±2.15
GPLVM, R32.39±2.36 0.01±0.01 0.20±0.38 0 .20±0.38 0.05±0.07
GPHLVM, L31.18±1.35 0 .01±0.03 0 .04±0.08 0 .03±0.07 0 .05±0.07
GRASPSGPLVM, R27.25±5.40 0 .39±0.41 0 .40±0.44 0 .53±0.77 0 .60±0.73
GPHLVM, L25.47±4.07 0 .14±0.16 0 .18±0.29 0 .35±0.78 0 .48±0.76
GPLVM, R38.15±5.85 0.14±0.18 0 .15±0.19 0 .29±0.64 0 .38±0.66
GPHLVM, L38.37±5.71 0.04±0.08 0 .07±0.18 0 .23±0.68 0 .37±0.72
SUPPORT
POSESGPLVM, R23.93±3.97 0 .58±0.94 0 .63±0.94 0 .66±0.99 0.85±1.73
GPHLVM, L22.05±2.50 0 .51±0.82 0 .53±0.83 0 .56±0.86 0.86±1.70
GPLVM, R33.76±3.74 0 .24±0.40 0 .29±0.39 0 .30±0.43 0 .55±1.26
GPHLVM, L33.78±3.71 0 .30±0.38 0 .35±0.45 0 .37±0.50 0 .69±1.36
This inherent property makes hyperbolic spaces a natural fit
to embed hierarchical taxonomies with a tree-like structure,
as the bimanual manipulation and hand grasps taxonomies.
In the case of the support pose taxonomy, the Euclidean
models with 3-dimensional latent space slightly outperform
the3-dimensional hyperbolic embeddings. We attribute this
to the cyclic graph structure of the taxonomy. Such type of
structure has been shown to be better embedded in spherical
or Euclidean spaces (Gu et al., 2019). Interestingly, despite
the cyclic graph structure of the support pose taxonomy, the
Euclidean models are still outperformed by the hyperbolic
embeddings in the 2-dimensional case (see Table 1). This
suggests that the increase of volume available to match the
graph structure in hyperbolic spaces compared to Euclidean
spaces leads to better low-dimensional representations of
taxonomy data, including those with cyclic graph structure.
Importantly, a comparative study reported in App. H.1
shows that the GPHLVM also outperformed vanilla and hy-
perbolic versions of a V AE to encode meaningful taxonomy
information in the latent space. For all taxonomies, adding
the stress regularization (11) to the V AEs helps to preserve
the graph distance structure, although the embeddings of
different taxonomy nodes are not as clearly separated as
in the GPHLVMs. This is illustrated by the higher aver-
age stress of the V AEs’ latent embeddings and their higher
reconstruction error compared to the GPHLVMs’ (see Ta-
ble 13). Finally, we also tested a GPLVM for learning a
Riemannian manifold (Tosi et al., 2014) of the taxonomy
data, reported in App. H.2, which is unable to capture the lo-
cal and global data structure as this model was not originally
designed for hierarchical discrete data.
Runtimes: Table 2 shows the runtime measurements for
the training and decoding phases of GPHLVM and GPLVM.
The main computational burden arises in the GPHLVM with
a2-dimensional latent space, which is in sharp contrast with
the experiments using a 3-dimensional latent space. ThisTable 2: Average runtime for training and decoding phases over 10
experiments of the hand grasps taxonomy. Training time was mea-
sured over 500iterations for both models. The implementations
are fully developed on Python, and the runtime measurements were
taken using a standard laptop with 32GB RAM, Intel Xeon CPU
E3-1505M v6 processor, and Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.
MODEL TRAINING DECODING
GPLVM, R22.978s±0.082 6 .256ms ±0.314
GPHLVM, L2414.67s±30.87 2 .74s±0.487
GPLVM, R33.148s±0.171 6 .774ms ±0.545
GPHLVM, L36.887s±0.307 10 .34ms±1.05
increase in computational cost is mainly attributed to the
2-dimensional hyperbolic kernel (see Table 9 in App. G.3).
This may be alleviated by reducing the number of samples
or via more efficient sampling strategies.
Taxonomy expansion and unseen poses encoding: An
advantage of back-constrained GPLVMs is their affordance
to “embed” new observations into the latent space. We
test the GPHLVM ability to place unseen class instances
or unobserved taxonomy classes into the latent space, hy-
pothesizing that their respective embeddings should be po-
sitioned to preserve the relative distances within the taxon-
omy graph compared to the other latent points. First, we
consider back-constrained GPHLVMs with stress prior pre-
viously trained on a subset of the taxonomies data (i.e., the
models in Figs. 2c, 3c, 11c) and embedded unseen class in-
stances. Figures 2d, 3d and 11d show how the new data land
close to their respective class cluster. Second, we train new
GPHLVMs for the three taxonomies while withholding all
data instance from one or several classes (see App. G.2.4).
We then encode these data and find that they preserve the
relative taxonomy graph distances when compared to the
model trained on the full dataset. Although this is accom-
plished by both models, our GPHLVMs display lower stress
values (see Table 1).
8
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
Figure 4: Motions obtained via geodesic interpolation in the back-
constrained GPHLVM latent space. Top: Grasp taxonomy from
ring ( Ri) to index finger extension ( IE).Bottom : Support pose
taxonomy from LFRH toK2RH. Gray circles denote contacts.
Trajectory generation via geodesics: The geometry of
the GPHLVM latent space can also be exploited to generate
trajectories in the latent space by following the geodesic,
i.e., the shortest path, between two embeddings. In other
words, our GPHLVM intrinsically provides a mechanism
to plan motions via geodesics in the low-dimensional latent
space. Examples of geodesics between two embeddings
for the three taxonomies are shown in Figs. 2b-2c, 3b-3c,
and 11b-11c, with the colors along the trajectory matching
the class corresponding to the closest hyperbolic latent point.
Importantly, the geodesics in GPHLVMs latent space follow
the transitions between classes defined in the taxonomy. In
other words, the shortest paths in the hyperbolic embed-
ding correspond to the shortest paths in the taxonomy graph.
For instance, in the case of the support pose taxonomy, the
geodesic from LFtoF2RHfollows LF→F2→F2RH.
Straight lines in the Euclidean embeddings are more likely
to deviate from the graph shortest path, resulting in transi-
tions that do not exist in the taxonomy, e.g., RFRH →F2in
the Euclidean latent space of Figs. 11b-11c. Figure 4 and
App. G.7 show motions resulting from geodesic interpola-
tion in the GPHLVM latent space. The obtained motions are
more realistic than those obtained via linear interpolation in
the GPLVM latent space and as realistic as those obtained
via VPoser (Pavlakos et al., 2019) (see Figs. 16-17).
6. Conclusions
Inspired by the recent developments of human motion tax-
onomies, we proposed a computational model GPHLVM
that leveraged two types of domain knowledge: the structure
of a human-designed taxonomy and a hyperbolic geome-
try on the latent space which complies with the intrinsic
taxonomy’s hierarchical structure. Our GPHLVM allows
us to learn hyperbolic embeddings of the features of the
taxonomy nodes while capturing the associated hierarchical
structure. To achieve this, our model exploited the curvature
of the hyperbolic manifold and the graph-distance informa-
tion as inductive bias. We showed that these two forms
of inductive biases are essential to learn taxonomy-aware
embeddings, encode unseen data, and potentially expand
the learned taxonomy. Moreover, we reported that vanillaEuclidean approaches underperformed on all the forego-
ing cases. Finally, we introduced a mechanism to generate
taxonomy-aware motions in the hyperbolic latent space.
Note that we assumed that the desired hierarchy is mainly
provided by the given taxonomy, which we use as inductive
bias in our model. Although our assumption is that the pro-
vided taxonomy structure is accurate, our model may also
be encouraged to discover additional hierarchical structure
by adjusting the scale γof the stress loss function. This
is particularly interesting for cases where the provided tax-
onomy is incomplete or inexact, and thus a lower scale
may allow the model to prioritize unsupervised discovery
of a hierarchical structure from the dataset itself, mitigating
the impact of potential taxonomy errors. An interesting
extension to our work would be incorporating uncertainty
measures for the taxonomy graph. If quantifiable measures
of uncertainty for specific nodes or relationships exist, we
could integrate them into the stress loss. This would allow
us to down-weight the influence of unreliable nodes of the
taxonomy, further improving robustness.
Our proposed GPHLVM opens the door to potential applica-
tions in fields like bioinformatics. For instance, GPHLVM
may uncover hierarchical structures associated to protein
interactions (Alanis-Lobato et al., 2018) or within biolog-
ical sequences (Corso et al., 2021; Macaulay et al., 2023).
Moreover, the availability of a motion taxonomy structure
empowers the GPHLVM to impact various downstream
tasks, including robot motion generation, robotic grasping
and manipulation, human motion prediction, and character
animation. In particular, the taxonomy prior may compen-
sate for the lack of data in some of the foregoing applica-
tions. Unlike other LVMs such as VPoser (Pavlakos et al.,
2019), GAN-S (Davydov et al., 2022), and TEACH (Athana-
siou et al., 2022), which are trained on full human motion
trajectories and thousands of datapoints, our model lever-
ages the taxonomies as inductive bias to better structure
the learned embeddings, and uses geodesics as a simple
and effective motion generator between single poses. How-
ever, as other models, our geodesic motion generation does
not use explicit knowledge on how physically feasible the
generated trajectories are. We plan to investigate how to
include physics constraints or explicit contact data into the
GPHLVM to obtain physically-feasible motions. We will
also work on alleviating the computational cost of the hy-
perbolic kernel by using more efficient sampling strategies.
For example, instead of sampling from a Gaussian distribu-
tion for the approximation (6), we could sample from the
Rayleigh distribution. This is because complex numbers,
whose real and imaginary components are i.i.d. Gaussian,
have absolute value that is Rayleigh-distributed. Finally, we
will investigate other manifold geometries to accommodate
more complex structures coming from highly-heterogeneous
graphs (Giovanni et al., 2022).
9
Bringing Motion Taxonomies to Continuous Domains via GPLVM on Hyperbolic manifolds
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of Machine Learning by incorporating different types of
inductive bias in latent variable models. The introduction
of such inductive bias — particularly those related to taxon-
omy structures — may lead to more explainable Machine
Learning models.
Acknowledgements
NJ and TA were supported by the Carl Zeiss Foundation
through the JuBot project and by the European Union’s Hori-
zon Europe Framework Programme under grant agreement
No 101070596 (euROBIN). MGD collaborated in this work
during his PhD sabbatical at the Bosch Center for Artificial
Intelligence (BCAI). VB was supported by an ETH Z ¨urich
Postdoctoral Fellowship.
References
Abbasi, B., Noohi, E., Parastegari, S., and ˇZefran, M. Grasp
taxonomy based on force distribution. In IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication (RO-MAN) , pp. 1098–1103, 2016. doi:
10.1109/ROMAN.2016.7745245.
Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I. A. Handbook of mathemat-
ical functions with formulas, graphs, and mathematical
tables , volume 55. US Government printing office, 1964.
doi: 10.5555/1098650.
Absil, P.-A., Mahony, R., and Sepulchre, R. Optimization
Algorithms on Matrix Manifolds . Princeton University
Press, 2007. URL https://press.princeton.
edu/absil .
Alanis-Lobato, G., Mier, P., and Andrade-Navarro, M. The
latent geometry of the human protein interaction network.
Bioinformatics , 34(16):2826–2834, 2018. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty206.
Athanasiou, N., Petrovich, M., Black, M. J., and Varol, G.
Teach: Temporal action compositions for 3d humans. In
International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , pp. 414–
423, 2022. doi: 10.1109/3DV57658.2022.00053.
Balasubramanian, S., Melendez-Calderon, A., Roby-Brami,
A., and Burdet, E. On the analysis of movement smooth-
ness. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation ,
12(112), 2015. doi: 10.1186/s12984-015-0090-9.
Bitzer, S. and Williams, C. K. I. Kick-starting
GPLVM optimization via a connection to metric
mds. In Proceedings of the NIPS 2010 Work-
shop on Challenges of Data Visualization , 2010.
URL https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=
ee20fa087731a2b2f90d196e98aa959a196cfeb5 .
Borovitskiy, V ., Terenin, A., Mostowsky, P., and
Deisenroth, M. P. Mat ´ern Gaussian processes
on Riemannian manifolds. In Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , pp. 12426–
12437, 2020. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
92bf5e6240737e0326ea59846a83e076-Paper.
pdf.
Borovitskiy, V ., Azangulov, I., Terenin, A., Mostowsky,
P., Deisenroth, M., and Durrande, N. Mat ´ern Gaus-
sian processes on graphs. In Intl. Conf. on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistic (AISTATS) , pp. 2593–2601,
2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v130/borovitskiy21a.html .
Borr `as, J., Mandery, C., and Asfour, T. A whole-body
support pose taxonomy for multi-contact humanoid robot
motions. Science Robotics , 2(13), 2017. doi: 10.1126/
scirobotics.aaq0560.
Bose, J., Smofsky, A., Liao, R., Panangaden, P., and
Hamilton, W. Latent variable modelling with hy-
perbolic normalizing flows. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp. 1045–1055,
2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v119/bose20a.html .
Boumal, N. An introduction to optimization on smooth
manifolds . Cambridge University Press, 2023. URL
http://www.nicolasboumal.net/book .
Bullock, I. M., Ma, R. R., and Dollar, A. M. A hand-centric
classification of human and robot dexterous manipulation.
IEEE Transactions on Haptics , 6(2):129–144, 2013. doi:
10.1109/TOH.2012.53.
B´ecigneul, G. and Ganea, O.-E. Riemannian adaptive
optimization methods. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019. URL https:
//openreview.net/pdf?id=r1eiqi09K7 .
Chami, I., Gu, A., Chatziafratis, V ., and R ´e, C. From
trees to continuous embeddings and back: Hy-
perbolic hierarchical clustering. In Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , pp. 15065–
15076, 2020. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
ac10ec1ace51b2d973cd87973a98d3ab-Paper.
pdf.
Chavel, I. Eigenvalues in Riemannian geometry . Academic
press, 1984.
10
