PROBING THEGEOMETRY OFDIFFUSIONMODELS
WITH THESTRINGMETHOD
Elio Moreau∗
Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
elio.moreau@ens.psl.euFlorentin Coeurdoux
Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
florentin.coeurdoux@cfm.com
Grégoire Ferre
Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
gregoire.ferre@cfm.comEric Vanden-Eijnden
ML Lab, Capital Fund Management
23 Rue de l’Université, 75007 Paris
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
New York University,
New York, NY 10012, USA,
eve2@cims.nyu.edu
ABSTRACT
Understanding the geometry of learned distributions is fundamental to improving and interpreting
diffusion models, yet systematic tools for exploring their landscape remain limited. Standard latent-
space interpolations fail to respect the structure of the learned distribution, often traversing low-density
regions. We introduce a framework based on the string method that computes continuous paths
between samples by evolving curves under the learned score function. Operating on pretrained models
without retraining, our approach interpolates between three regimes: pure generative transport,
which yields continuous sample paths; gradient-dominated dynamics, which recover minimum
energy paths (MEPs); and finite-temperature string dynamics, which compute principal curves—self-
consistent paths that balance energy and entropy. We demonstrate that the choice of regime matters
in practice. For image diffusion models, MEPs contain high-likelihood but unrealistic “cartoon”
images, confirming prior observations that likelihood maxima appear unrealistic; principal curves
instead yield realistic morphing sequences despite lower likelihood. For protein structure prediction,
our method computes transition pathways between metastable conformers directly from models
trained on static structures, yielding paths with physically plausible intermediates. Together, these
results establish the string method as a principled tool for probing the modal structure of diffusion
models—identifying modes, characterizing barriers, and mapping connectivity in complex learned
distributions.
1 Introduction
Generative models based on diffusion and flow matching have achieved remarkable success in learning complex data
distributions. These models transport individual samples from noise to data, implicitly encoding an energy landscape
through learned score functions. Yet this point-wise perspective obscures the global geometry of the learned distribution:
its modal structure, the barriers between modes, and the connectivity of the data manifold.
Understanding pathways between samples has broad applications: morphing between configurations, identifying
transition states, and revealing mechanisms underlying rare events. In molecular systems, such pathways explain
conformational changes and folding; in other domains, they can illuminate how the learned distribution connects distinct
modes. However, current generators provide only samples, not the pathways between them. Exploiting the geometric
∗Elio Moreau is the corresponding author. Email: elio.moreau@ens.psl.eu.arXiv:2602.22122v1  [stat.ML]  25 Feb 2026
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
12
3
4
Data Points
Principal Curve
MEP
1
23
4
Figure 1:The likelihood-realism paradox.Top: schematic showing the MEP (green) passing through the high-
likelihood region (yellow), while the principal curve (red) stays within the typical set where data concentrates (blue
points). Dashed lines indicate V oronoi cells—regions of points closest to each image along the string. Bottom: actual
images at numbered locations. Endpoints (1, 2) are identical for both paths; the principal curve intermediate (3) is
realistic; the MEP intermediate (4) is cartoonish. Full pathways computed by our method are shown in Figures 4 and 5.
information encoded in the learned landscape requires a principled definition of transition pathways, along with a
computational procedure to find them.
We introduce a framework that evolves entirecurvesof samples—strings—rather than individual points. By controlling
how these strings interact with the learned score function, we can probe different aspects of the distribution geometry.
Figure 1 previews our main finding: the choice of dynamics reveals a fundamental tension between likelihood and
realism. Paths that maximize likelihood traverse “cartoon” configurations—simplified, stylized images that the model
assigns high probability but that lie outside the typical set. Paths that account for entropy, in contrast, remain within the
typical set and produce perceptually natural transitions. This paper makes three main contributions:
1.We adapt the string method from computational chemistry to work with learned score functions, enabling pathway
computation from pretrained generative models without explicit energy functions.
2.We show how three choices of dynamics—pure transport, gradient-dominated, and finite-temperature—reveal
complementary aspects of the learned landscape.
3.We demonstrate that accounting for entropy is essential for realistic pathways in high dimensions—principal curves
traverse the typical set while MEPs do not—and illustrate this on image morphing and protein conformational
transitions.
Importantly, our method operates directly on pretrained models without any retraining or fine-tuning. Given only
access to the learned velocity field btand score st, we can compute strings in any of the three regimes. This makes the
approach immediately applicable to existing models.
1.1 Related Work
Transition path methods.Computing pathways between metastable states has a long history in computational
chemistry. The nudged elastic band method [ 1] and string methods [ 2,3,4] evolve chains of configurations to find
minimum (free) energy paths. Extensions like the finite-temperature string method [ 5] incorporate entropic effects by
computing principal curves [ 6], building on concepts from transition path theory [ 7,8]. These methods traditionally
require explicit, time-independent energy functions or force fields. Our key contribution is adapting them to time-
dependent energies defined implicitly through learned score functions, enabling pathway computation directly from
pretrained generative models.
Generative modeling.Diffusion models and flows [ 9,10] learn to reverse a noising process. Stochastic interpolants
[11,12], flow matching [ 13], and rectified flows [ 14] provide unified frameworks connecting these approaches. Our
2
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
method builds on this foundation, using the learned velocity and score fields to define string dynamics. Recent work
observed that likelihood-maximizing points in diffusion models appear “cartoonish”—perceptually unrealistic despite
high probability [ 15,16]. We attribute this paradox to concentration of measure in high dimensions, and resolve it via
finite-temperature string dynamics that account for entropy.
Image morphing.Interpolating between images in generative models is typically done via linear paths in latent space,
but such paths often traverse low-density regions producing unrealistic intermediates. DiffMorpher [ 17] addresses
this through attention interpolation and self-attention guidance; other methods optimize latent trajectories [ 18]. Our
framework differs by grounding interpolation in the geometry of the learned distribution, showing that naive approaches
fail by ignoring entropy and that accounting for it yields realistic paths without task-specific modifications.
Protein conformations.Recent generative models learn conformational distributions from structural databases:
AlphaFlow [ 19] fine-tunes AlphaFold with flow matching, while DiG [ 20], EigenFold [ 21], ConfDiff [ 22], and
FoldingDiff [ 23] train diffusion models on conformational ensembles. These methods sample individual conformations
but do not provide transition pathways between them—yet such pathways are essential for understanding protein
function, since biological activity often involves conformational changes [ 24,25]. Our string method complements
these approaches by computing pathways directly from the learned score, potentially revealing folding mechanisms and
conformational change dynamics from models trained only on static structures.
2 Methodology
2.1 Generative Models as Score-Based Dynamics
Diffusion and flow-matching models learn to reverse a noising process that transforms data into noise. At the heart of
these methods is a time-dependent density ρt(x)interpolating between a simple density ρ0(x)(typically Gaussian) and
the data density ρ1(x). The model learns either a velocity field bt(x)or a score function st(x) =∇logρ t(x), which
are related through the structure of the interpolation.
Sampling proceeds by integrating a forward-time dynamics. In its most general form, this takes the shape of an SDE:
dxt=bt(xt)|{z}
transportdt+γ2
tst(xt)|{z}
score correctiondt+√
2γtdWt|{z}
noise,(1)
where the volatility γt≥0can be tuned. Setting γt= 0recovers the deterministic probability flow ODE; positive γt
yields stochastic samplers.
A key observation is that st(x) =−∇V t(x)where Vt(x) =−logρ t(x)is an implicit energy landscape. While we
cannot evaluateV tdirectly, the learned score provides access to its gradient—exactly what the string method requires.
Crucially, the score is estimated via Stein’s identity (Gaussian integration by parts), which requires adding noise to the
signal. As t→1 , the noise vanishes and this estimator degrades—the learned score becomes unreliable precisely at the
data distribution. This is why generative models sample via nonequilibrium transport (pushing noise toward data) rather
than Langevin dynamics on s1. For the same reason, we cannot simply evolve strings under s1; instead, we must work
dynamically across the full time interval, leveraging reliable scores at intermediate times. More theoretical details on
diffusion models can be found in Appendix A.
2.2 The String Method: General Formulation
The classical string method [ 2,3] evolves curves under a time-independent potential V(x) . Here we generalize to
time-dependent velocitiesv t(x)arising from diffusion models. Fors∈(0,1), the string evolves according to
˙ϕt(s) =v t(ϕt(s)) +λ t(s)∂ sϕt(s),(2)
where λt(s)is a Lagrange multiplier enforcing the constraint |∂sϕt(s)|=const ins. This constraint prevents bunching
or spreading of points—without it, points would cluster at attractors of vtrather than tracing a path between them. The
endpoints ϕt(0)andϕt(1)follow the probability flow ODE ˙ϕt=bt(ϕt), which serve as boundary conditions for the
string evolution.
Discrete algorithm.We discretize the string as N+ 1 images {ϕ(i)
t}N
i=0. The endpoints ϕ(0)
tandϕ(N)
tfollow the
probability flow; the interior imagesi= 1, . . . , N−1evolve via alternating steps (Figure 2):
3
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
Step 1: Evolution.Move each interior image usingv t:
ϕ(i)
t+∆t =ϕ(i)
t+ ∆t v t(ϕ(i)
t), i= 1, . . . , N−1.(3)
Step 2: Reparametrization.Redistribute images to restore equal arc-length spacing via linear or cubic spline
interpolation (for details see Appendix B.2).
The reparametrization implicitly enforces the λtconstraint. To fully specify the dynamics, we must choose both the
velocity field vtfor interior images and an initial string {ϕ(i)
0}N
i=0; both choices are discussed in Section 2.3. For more
details on the string method, we refer the reader to Appendix B.
2.3 From Transport to Energy to Entropy
What shouldv tbe? We consider three choices, each motivated by limitations of the previous one.
2.3.1 Pure Transport (γ t= 0)
ϕtϕt+1ϕt+2
vt
Rep
Figure 2:The string method.Grey dashed arrows show Step 1 (evolu-
tion): each image moves according to vt, landing at positions marked
with×. Blue dotted arrows show Step 2 (reparametrization): images
are redistributed to restore equal arc-length spacing along the string.The simplest choice sets vt=bt, the learned
velocity field:
˙ϕt(s) =b t(ϕt(s)) +λ t(s)∂ sϕt(s).(4)
Starting from a curve of noise samples at
t= 0 , this produces at t= 1 a con-
tinuous path morphing between generated
images. For variance-preserving schedules
where ρ0=N(0, I) , typical noise samples
have norm approximately√
d. Given two
such samples z0andz1, a natural initializa-
tion is
ϕ0(s) =z 0cos(πs/2) +z 1sin(πs/2),(5)
which traces an approximate geodesic on this
sphere; a reparametrization step may be ap-
plied to enforce |∂sϕ0(s)|=const exactly.
Alternatively, to morph between two specific
data samples xAandxB, we can integrate
the probability flow backward from t= 1 to
t= 0 to obtain z0andz1and use these as
endpoints—this is the approach taken in our
experiments.
Pure transport produces visually appealing morphs, but the resulting path is simply the image of the initial string under
the flow. While individual images remain typical samples of ρt, the path as a curve is not intrinsically defined—it
depends entirely on the initialization. To obtain paths with a principled geometric meaning, we must incorporate the
score.
2.3.2 Minimum Energy Paths (γ t≫1,T= 0)
Adding the score term to the velocity connects the string to the energy landscapeV t=−logρ t:
vt=bt+γ2
tst=bt−γ2
t∇Vt.(6)
In the limit γt→ ∞ , the score term dominates and the string relaxes rapidly toward high-density regions of ρt. Since
this relaxation is much faster than the evolution of Vtitself, the string effectively sees a quasi-static energy landscape at
each time, recovering the classical string method and computingminimum energy paths(MEPs).
Definition 2.1(Minimum Energy Path).A curve ϕ∗: [0,1]→Rdis an MEP if the energy gradient (and hence the
score) is everywhere tangent to the path:
[∇V(ϕ∗(s))]⊥=−[s(ϕ∗(s))]⊥= 0,∀s∈[0,1],
where[·]⊥denotes the component perpendicular to the tangent∂ sϕ∗.
4
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
Since in our setting Vt=−logρ t, minimizing energy is equivalent to maximizing likelihood: MEPs aremaximum
likelihood pathsconnecting two endpoints.
MEPs are geometrically well-defined: they pass through saddle points, identify transition states, and characterize barrier
heights. However, in high dimensions, a fundamental problem emerges.
The likelihood-realism paradox.MEPs maximize likelihood along the path, but in high dimensions, high likelihood
does not imply high probability mass. Probability mass depends on both the density ρ(x) and the volume of nearby
configuration space; the latter is an entropic contribution that dominates in high dimensions. Regions where the
product of density and volume is maximized form thetypical set—where samples actually concentrate.2As a result,
MEPs traverse modes, which lie outside the typical set.
This explains the “cartoon” phenomenon [ 15,16]: likelihood-maximizing images appear simplified and unrealistic.
Our experiments confirm this—as γincreases, MEPs traverse higher-likelihood regions with increasingly cartoonish
intermediates (Figure 4).
To find paths connecting samples that remain within the typical set, we must account for entropy. Principal curves,
discussed next, achieve this.
2.3.3 Principal Curves (γ t≫1,T >0)
Principal curves were introduced by [6] to find structure in unstructured data.
Definition 2.2(Principal Curve).A curve ϕ∗: [0,1]→Rdis a principal curve for a distribution ρif it is
self-consistent: each point equals the conditional expectation of points that project onto it:
ϕ∗(s) =E ρ[X|s∗(X) =s],∀s∈[0,1],
wheres∗(X) = arg min s′∥X−ϕ∗(s′)∥is the projection ofXonto the curve.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
t103
102
101
100101102model/bracketleftBig/bardblst−ˆst/bardbl
/bardblst/bardbl/bracketrightBig
2 dimensions
8 dimensions
20 dimensions
Figure 3:Relative score estimation error:
Emodel[|st−ˆst|/|st|]as a function of tfor a mix-
ture of Gaussians in various dimensions. The
error increases sharply near t= 1 , motivating
the quenching of γtast→1 . For details see
Appendix CIn our setting, we take ρ=ρ T∝ρ1/T
1, where ρ1is the data dis-
tribution and T∈[0,1] controls the energy-entropy balance, and
we fix the endpoints ϕ∗(0) =x Aandϕ∗(1) =x B. AtT= 1 , we
obtain principal curves for ρ1connecting the two samples through the
typical set; as T→0 ,ρTconcentrates near modes and the principal
curve converges to an MEP. Our experiments confirm that increasing
Tyields increasingly realistic intermediates (Figure 5).
To compute principal curves, we discretize them into N+ 1 images
{ϕ(i)
t}N
i=0, where the projection regions become V oronoi cells Vi=
{x:∥x−ϕ(i)∥<∥x−ϕ(j)∥for allj̸=i} . We associate to each
image a walkerx(i)
tthat samples its V oronoi cell via the full SDE:
dx(i)
t=bt(x(i)
t)dt+γ2
tst(x(i)
t)dt+√
2TγtdWt,(7)
where integration uses timesteps ∆t=O(γ−2
t), and we let each
walker drag its string image toward the running average of its posi-
tion. This effectively defines the velocity vtof the string. Walkers
must also remain closer to their associated string image than to any
other; moves violating this constraint are rejected, enforcing the
V oronoi restriction. Since btandstare time-dependent, we impose
a separation of timescales via γt≫1: the walkers equilibrate within
their V oronoi cells much faster than the landscape Vtevolves, so the string tracks an approximate principal curve at
each instant.
The complete finite-temperature string method iterates the following steps fort∈[0,1]:
Step 1: Walker evolution.Evolve each walker x(i)
taccording to (7), rejecting moves that violate the minimum-distance
criterion.
2For example, the density of a d-dimensional Gaussian N(0, I) is maximal at the origin, but typical samples lie on a sphere of
radiusr≈√
d.
5
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
Table 1: Three regimes of string dynamics.
Transport MEP Principal curve
γt= 0γ t≫1γ t≫1
T= 0T >0
Geometric No Yes Yes
Entropic No No Yes
Realistic Yes No Yes
Step 2: String update.Update each string image via EMA: ϕ(i)
t+∆t = (1−η)ϕ(i)
t+η x(i)
t+∆t , where η∈(0,1] controls
the averaging timescale.
Step 3: Reparametrization.Redistribute string images to equal arc-length spacing.
Remark2.3.One might ask why not compute principal curves directly on a pregenerated dataset or the original training
data. While this could work for curves that remain within high-density regions, we are primarily interested in principal
curves connecting metastable states—such as distinct protein conformations or image modes. These transition regions
are precisely where data points are scarce. The string method addresses this by using the learned score to sample locally
along the curve, even in low-density regions. This also highlights the importance of the boundary conditions in our
setting: we seek principal curves connecting two specified endpoints, which differs from Hastie’s original formulation
where the curve is unconstrained.
2.4 Summary and Implementation
Table 1 compares the three regimes in which our framework can operate: pure transport gives appealing but geometrically
unmotivated morphs; MEPs provide geometric grounding but fail in high dimensions; principal curves combine
geometric meaning with realistic outputs. Algorithm 1 provides the complete procedure for computing strings in any of
these regimes.
Algorithm 1Diffusion String Method
Require:Data samplesx A, xB; velocityb t; scores t
Require:Parametersγ t,T∈[0,1]; initial timet 0; number of imagesN; timestep∆t=O(γ−2
t)
1:z0, z1←integrate˙x t=bt(xt)fromt= 1tot= 0starting atx A, xB
2:Initialize:ϕ(i)
t0=z0cos(πi/2N) +z 1sin(πi/2N)fori= 0, . . . , N
3:Reparametrize{ϕ(i)
t0}to equal arc-length spacing
4:whilet <1do
5:fori= 0toNdo
6:Evolveϕ(i)
t(and walkerx(i)
tifT >0) according to chosen regime
7:end for
8:Reparametrize to equal arc-length spacing
9:end while
Output:String{ϕ(i)
1}N
i=0connectingx AtoxB
Quenching near t= 1 .When using γt>0(for example to compute MEPs or principal curves), we quench γt→0
ast→1 to avoid amplifying errors in the estimated score near the data distribution (Figure 3). This ensures that interior
images arrive accurately at t= 1 . The endpoints always evolve with pure transport ( γt= 0), so they return exactly to
xAandx B.
Computational cost.The three regimes differ in expense. Pure transport ( γt= 0) requires only forward integration of
btwith moderate timesteps. MEPs and principal curves ( γt≫1) require smaller timesteps ∆t=O(γ−2
t)for stability,
which dominates the computational cost. In practice, N= 50 –70images, and for principal curves η= 0.1 –0.5,
provide a good balance between path resolution and cost. Our focus is on interpretability rather than speed: the method
provides a tool for analyzing the geometry of pretrained diffusion models, requiring only access to btandstwithout
any retraining. Our experiments demonstrate that the approach is practical for realistic applications.
6
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
0 20 40 60
Image Index i2.5
0.02.55.07.510.012.515.0
Log Likelihood (dB/Dims)
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
Log10 Density of Images
Figure 4:Effect of score weight γ.Left: string realizations for γranging from 15 (top) to 2 (middle) to 10−2(bottom)
in logarithmic steps (factor of√
10). Higher γdrives paths through abstract, high-likelihood modes; lower γpreserves
realism. Right: log-likelihood of images along each string (colored curves), overlaid on the likelihood distribution
of ImageNet validation images (heatmap; see Figure 6 for details). The intermediate images along the MEP reach
likelihoods far exceeding typical images.
020 40 60 
Image Index i2.55.07.510.012.515.017.5L
og Likelihood (dB/Dims)
 6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
Log10 Density of Images
Figure 5:Effect of temperature T.Left: string realizations for Tranging from 0.1 (top) to 0.5 (middle) to 0.9
(bottom). Lower Tdrives paths through cartoon-like, high-likelihood regions; higher Tproduces realistic samples.
Right: log-likelihood of images along each string (colored curves), overlaid on the likelihood distribution of ImageNet
validation images (heatmap; see Figure 6). As Tincreases, the likelihood of the intermediates images decreases toward
typical values, and images become more realistic.
3 Experiments
We demonstrate the string method on two domains: ImageNet for the likelihood-realism paradox, and proteins for
conformational transitions.
3.1 Images: The Three Regimes on ImageNet
We apply the string method to ImageNet ( 256×256 ) using the SiT-XL-2-256 model [ 26]. Images are encoded to a
4×32×32 latent space via a V AE. Details of the model architecture are given in Appendix D. Additional image
pathways are shown in Appendix H.
Setup.Given two images, we: (1) encode into the Gaussian latent space by backward ODE to t= 0 , (2) initialize a
discrete string of N= 71 points along a spherical geodesic Eq (5), and (3) evolve the string according to Eq (7)with
score weight γt=γfor0.1≥t≥0.95 andγt= 0otherwise, where γis a tunable parameter described below. This
schedule prevents the string from drifting away from the typical set (i.e., the sphere in Gaussian latent space) near t= 0 ,
while avoiding regions where the score approximation degrades ast→1(Figure 3).
Effect of score weight γatT= 0 .Figure 4 visualizes strings interpolating between two beaver images for varying γ
andT= 0. Full strings are size 71, but we show only of subsample of 11 (1 image every 6).
With alargescore weight ( γ= 15 , top row), the string is driven toward high-likelihood regions, yielding intermediates
that lie close to the MEP. Notably, the maximum-likelihood intermediate is a highly abstract, nearly single-color image,
confirming thatthe MEP passes through likelihood maxima that lie outside the typical set and, as a result, are
perceptually unrealistic.
7
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
2.5
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5
Log Likelihood (dB/dim)0.000.010.020.030.040.050.06Density of Images0 5 10 15104
103
102
Imagnet Validation Set
MEPs
T = 0.1
T = 0.5
T = 0.9
Figure 6:Likelihood distributions.Histogram of log-
likelihoods for ImageNet 256×256 validation images (blue),
compared with images along MEPs (orange) and finite-
temperature strings at T= 0.1 (green), T= 0.5 (red),
andT= 0.9 (purple), aggregated across multiple strings.
MEP intermediates have significantly higher likelihood than
real images, confirming they lie outside the typical set. As
temperature increases, string images approach the likeli-
hood distribution of real data. Inset: same data on log scale.With amoderatescore weight ( γ= 2 , middle row), inter-
mediates becomecartoon-like, consistent with prior ob-
servations in diffusion-based interpolation [ 15,16]. With
smallscore guidance ( γ= 10−2, bottom row), the string
produces visually plausible intermediates throughout.
The left panel reports log-likelihood along each string:
for large γ, the trajectory passes through a pronounced
likelihood peak. The gap between typical-image likeli-
hoods and this maximum provides a rough estimate of
the data-manifold diameter in likelihood space.
Effect of temperature T.Figure 5 illustrates the finite-
temperature method for varyingTwhenγ= 7.
Atlow temperature( T= 0.1 , first row), results closely re-
semble those of the zero-temperature MEP string method,
recovering cartoon-like images. Atmoderate tempera-
ture(T= 0.5 , second row), intermediates exhibit slightly
more detail but remain cartoon-like. Athigh temperature
(T≈1 , final row),the principal curve passes through
realistic-looking intermediates that balance energy
and entropy.Additional examples illustrating the effect
of temperature can be found in Appendix H.
Principal curves.Figure 7 shows a principal curve be-
tween two images from thegooseclass, computed using
the finite-temperature method with T= 0.9 andγ= 7 .
The first row displays the principal curve itself: each im-
age is obtained by EMA from its associated walker. The
remaining three rows show the walkers at t= 1 that were used to compute the EMA. Upon close inspection, one can
observe subtle differences between walkers—an effect of entropy—which average out to produce the smoother images
along the principal curve.
Likelihood DistributionsIn Figure 6, we present the histogram of log-likelihood values for the ImageNet validation
set, alongside the log-likelihoods of images obtained from a large collection of strings generated using the algorithms
described above. The distribution corresponding to the MEP exhibits pronounced peaks at substantially higher
likelihoods than those observed for the validation set. Moreover, the finite-temperature strings display peaks whose
locations shift systematically with temperature: as the temperature increases, the peak likelihood decreases, indicating a
negative correlation between temperature and likelihood, consistent with theoretical expectations.
3.2 Proteins: Conformational Transitions
We apply the string method to predict transition pathways between protein conformations using two diffusion models.
One, called DiG [20], operates in SE(3) and it has been trained on experimental structures up to December 2020. The
other, ScoreMD [ 27], operates in R3and includes a Fokker–Planck regularization term during training to improve score
estimation neart= 1.
Motivation.Proteins fluctuate between metastable conformations, but experiments typically capture only static
snapshots. Transition pathways—the sequence of intermediate structures connecting conformers—are crucial for
understanding function but are rarely observed directly. Computational methods such as molecular dynamics can in
principle reveal these pathways, but the timescales involved often exceed what is computationally accessible [ 28]. We
demonstrate that our framework, applied to a pretrained generative model, can predict plausible transition pathways by
computing principal curves with the finite-temperature string method. These pathways connect endpoint conformations
while remaining within the typical set of the learned distribution, balancing likelihood and entropy.
Method.Given two conformations of the same protein, we apply the string method in the SE(3)-equivariant space of
the model. The score function is derived from the model’s denoising objective. Details are given in Appendices F and E.
8
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
Principal curve
Walkers
Figure 7:Principal curve for images from thegooseclass.Top row: images along the principal curve, computed as
the EMA of associated walkers ( T= 0.9 ,γ= 7 ). Bottom three rows: individual walkers at t= 1 . The walkers exhibit
subtle variations due to entropic effects (best seen when zoomed in); averaging produces the smoother images in the
principal curve.
Figure 8:Adenylate Kinase transition pathway.Pathway between the open (4AKE) and closed (1AKE) conformations
computed using DiG. Intermediate structures maintain physical plausibility (secondary structure preservation, no steric
clashes).
Adenylate Kinase.Adenylate kinase (AdK) is a phosphotransferase enzyme that undergoes a large-scale conforma-
tional change between open and closed states during catalysis [ 29]. This transition has been extensively studied as a
model system for understanding protein dynamics [ 30,31]. Using DiG, we computed the pathway between the open
(PDB: 4AKE) and closed (PDB: 1AKE) conformations (Figure 8). The intermediates preserve secondary structure
elements and avoid steric clashes, suggesting physically plausible transitions despite the model being trained only on
static structures.
BBA and Chignolin.BBA and Chignolin are small protein domains widely used as model systems for protein folding
due to their rapid folding kinetics and simple topologies [ 32]. Using ScoreMD [ 27], we computed minimum energy
paths (MEPs) connecting extended and folded conformations for both proteins.
For ScoreMD, the score function is accurately learned near t= 1 , allowing us to apply the classical string method at a
fixed time to compute MEPs. However, the high dimensionality and rough landscape make optimization sensitive to
initialization. We therefore use as initialization a string obtained by pure transport (γ= 0).
Figures 9 and 10 show the computed pathways projected onto the first two time-independent components (TICs)
[33]. Left panels display the MEP (yellow) and initial string (purple) projected onto TIC coordinates and overlaid on
a free-energy landscape, where free energy is estimated as −logρ from a histogram of i.i.d. samples generated by
ScoreMD; darker regions indicate lower free energy. The MEP is driven toward lower free-energy regions compared to
the initial string. Some path segments may appear to overlap due to projection from high dimensions; asterisks mark
equal arc-length intervals to clarify the geometry.
Right panels show the free energy profile along each pathway, relative to the starting conformation. The initial string has
significantly higher free energy than the converged MEP, demonstrating that the string relaxation is essential. Because
9
Probing the Geometry of Diffusion Models with the String Method
TIC 1TIC 2
Initial String
Converged String
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
length along path200
150
100
50
050Energy (kbT)
Initial String
Converged String
Figure 9:BBA folding pathway.Top: structures along the initial string obtained by pure transport ( γ= 0 ). Bottom:
structures along the converged MEP. Both show progressive formation of secondary structure. Left panel: initial string
(purple) and MEP (green) projected onto the first two TIC components, overlaid on a free-energy landscape estimated
from ScoreMD samples; darker regions indicate lower free energy. Asterisks mark equal arc-length intervals. Right
panel: energy profile along each pathway. The MEP achieves significantly lower energy than the initial string.
the dimensionality is substantially lower than in the image setting, the MEPs remain physically realistic rather than
cartoonish.
Above the two panels for each protein, we include a three-dimensional rendering of its folding pathway; the protein is
colored consistently with the corresponding pathway to facilitate visual correspondence.
4 Conclusion
We adapted the string method to probe the geometry of learned distributions using score functions from pretrained
generative models. By varying the dynamics—pure transport, gradient-dominated, or finite-temperature—we reveal
complementary aspects of the distribution landscape.
Our key finding is that accounting for entropy is essential in high dimensions. Minimum energy paths traverse
high-likelihood but low-probability regions, producing cartoonish artifacts. Principal curves, which balance energy
against entropy, yield realistic transitions with stronger theoretical grounding. These results confirm and explain prior
observations that high-likelihood samples from diffusion models appear unrealistic [ 15,16]: the phenomenon is not a
model defect but a consequence of concentration of measure, and can be resolved by accounting for entropy.
This establishes the string method as a tool for analyzing generative models beyond sampling: identifying modes,
characterizing barriers, and mapping connectivity in complex learned distributions. Importantly, the method requires no
retraining—only access to the learned velocity and score fields.
10
